[Saint Narada visits hermitage of Valmiki -- Valmiki queries about a single perfect individual bestowed with all good qualities enumerated by him -- Narada, knower of past, present and future, identifies such a man -- describes virtues, qualities of Sri Rama -- narrates briefly the story of his life.]

तपस्स्वाध्यायनिरतं तपस्वी वाग्विदां वरम् ।

नारदं परिपप्रच्छ वाल्मीकिर्मुनिपुङ्गवम् ।।1.1.1।।


तपस्वी ascetic, वाल्मीकिः Valmiki, तपः स्वाध्यायनिरतम् highly delighted in the practice of religious austerities and study of vedas, वाग्विदां वरम् eloquent among the knowledgeable, मुनिपुङ्गवम् preeminent among sages, नारदम् Narada, परिपप्रच्छ enquired.

Ascetic Valmiki enquired of Narada, preeminent among the sages ever engaged in the practice of religious austerities or study of the Vedas and best among the eloquent.
कोन्वस्मिन्साम्प्रतं लोके गुणवान्कश्च वीर्यवान् ।

धर्मज्ञश्च कृतज्ञश्च सत्यवाक्यो दृढव्रतः।।1.1.2।।


अस्मिन् लोके in this world, साम्प्रतम् now, गुणवान् endowed with excellent qualities, कः नु who indeed, वीर्यवांश्च with prowess, धर्मज्ञः च knower of righteousness, कृतज्ञः च grateful (who remembers even little help done by others), सत्यवाक्यः truthful in his statements, दृढव्रतः firm in his vows (till such time he achieves the results), कः who?

"Who in this world lives today endowed with excellent qualities, prowess, righteousness, gratitude, truthfulness and firmness in his vows?
चारित्रेण च को युक्तस्सर्वभूतेषु को हितः ।

विद्वान्कः कस्समर्थश्च कश्चैकप्रियदर्शनः ।।1.1.3।।


कः who?, चारित्रेण with good conduct, युक्तः is endowed, कः who?, सर्वभूतेषु for all living beings, हितः benefactor, कः who?, विद्वान् learned man (knower of everything which is to be known), कः who?, समर्थः च competent (capable of doing things which cannot be done by others), कः who? एकप्रियदर्शनः च solely delightful in appearance to everyone,

Who is that one gifted with good conduct, given to the wellbeing of all living creatures, learned in the lore (knowledge of all things that is known), capable of doing things which others can not do and singularly handsome?
आत्मवान्को जितक्रोधो द्युतिमान्कोऽनसूयकः ।

कस्य बिभ्यति देवाश्च जातरोषस्य संयुगे ।।1.1.4।।


आत्मवान् self restrained, कः who?, जितक्रोधः one who has conquered anger, द्युतिमान् one who is endowed with splendour, अनसूयकः one who is free from envy (envy depicting one's merits as weak points), कः who?, जातरोषस्य excited to wrath, कस्य to whom, संयुगे in the battle, देवाः च celestial beings, devatas, बिभ्यति are afraid of.

Who (among men) is self restrained? Who has conquered anger? Who is endowed with brilliance and free from envy? Who is that when exited to wrath even the devatas, are afraid of (let alone foes)?
एतदिच्छाम्यहं श्रोतुं परं कौतूहलं हि मे ।

महर्षे त्वं समर्थोऽसि ज्ञातुमेवंविधं नरम् ।।1.1.5।।


एतत् this, अहम् I, श्रोतुम् to listen, इच्छामि am desirous, मे my, कौतूहलम् curiosity, परं हि is great, महर्षे O Maharshi, त्वम् you, एवंविधम् of such (virtues), नरम् man, ज्ञातुम् to know, समर्थः असि are competent.

O Maharshi, I intend to hear about such a man whom you are able to place? Indeed great is my curiosity".
श्रुत्वा चैतत्ित्रलोकज्ञो वाल्मीकेर्नारदो वचः ।

श्रूयतामिति चामन्त्त्र्य प्रहृष्टो वाक्यमब्रवीत् ।।1.1.6।।


त्रिलोकज्ञः cognizant of three worlds, नारदः Narada, वाल्मीकेः Valmiki's, एतत् वचः these words, श्रुत्वा च having heard, श्रूयताम् इति "Listen to me", चामन्त्त्र्य च having invited, प्रहृष्टः was delighted, वाक्यम् words, अब्रवीत् spoke.

Invited by Valmiki to take his seat Narada, knower of the three worlds heard him and said with delight "listen to me". And thus spoke.
बहवो दुर्लभाश्चैव ये त्वया कीर्तिता गुणाः ।

मुने वक्ष्याम्यहं बुद्ध्वा तैर्युक्तश्श्रूयतान्नरः ।।1.1.7।।


मुने OSage Valmiki, बहवः many, दुर्लभाः च एव rare indeed are the ordinary people endowed with such qualities, ये गुणाः those qualities, त्वया by you, कीर्तिताः described, तैः with those qualities, युक्तः endowed with, नरः man, श्रूयताम् listen, अहम् I, बुद्ध्वा having ascertained, वक्ष्यामि shall tell you.

"O sage rare indeed are men endowed with the many qualities you have described. I ascertained one. Listen carefully.
इक्ष्वाकुवंशप्रभवो रामो नाम जनैश्श्रुतः ।

नियतात्मा महावीर्यो द्युतिमान्धृतिमान् वशी ।।1.1.8।।


इक्ष्वाकुवंशप्रभवः born in the race of king Ikshvaku, रामः नाम known as Rama (one who delights others), जनैः by people, श्रुतः is heard, नियतात्मा steady natured (meaning thereby immutable form), महावीर्यः incomprehensible prowess, द्युतिमान् self effulgent, धृतिमान् self commanding, वशी subjecting the senses (subjecting the entire world under his control).

People have heard his name as Rama, who was born in the race of king Ikshvaku,
having steady nature, possessing incomprehensible prowess, self effulgent, self commanding and subjecting senses under his control.
बुद्धिमान्नीतिमान्वाग्मी श्रीमान् शत्रुनिबर्हणः ।

विपुलांसो महाबाहुः कम्बुग्रीवो महाहनुः ।।1.1.9।।


बुद्धिमान् great intellectual, नीतिमान् learned in ethical (statecraft) philosophy, वाग्मी proficient in speeches, श्रीमान् possessing vast auspiciousness, शत्रुनिबर्हणः destroyer of foes (sins), विपुलांसः broad shouldered, महाबाहुः stron garmed, कम्बुग्रीवः possessing conch shaped neck, महाहनुः having prominent and strong cheeks.

He (Sri Rama) is a great intellectual, adherent to rules, eloquent, handsome, destroyer of foes (sins), broad shouldered, strong armed, having conch shaped neck and prominent cheeks.
महोरस्को महेष्वासो गूढजत्रुररिन्दमः ।

आजानुबाहुस्सुशिरास्सुललाटस्सुविक्रमः ।।1.1.10।।


महोरस्कः having broad chest, महेष्वासः armed with a great bow (meaning thereby having strong body to carry a bow), गूढजत्रुः has fleshy collar bones, अरिन्दमः is destroyer of foes (sins), आजानुबाहुः has arms extending upto knees, सुशिराः head with noble qualities, सुललाटः has a large and beautiful forehead, सुविक्रमः is endowed with mighty prowess.

Possessing a broad chest, armed with a great bow, with fleshy collar bones, knee long arms, a noble head, a graceful forehead and great prowess, he is the destroyer of foes (sins).
समस्समविभक्ताङ्गस्स्निग्धवर्णः प्रतापवान् ।

पीनवक्षा विशालाक्षो लक्ष्मीवान् शुभलक्षणः ।। 1.1.11।।


समः neither too tall nor too short, समविभक्ताङ्गः has well proportioned limbs, स्निग्धवर्णः has shining complexion, प्रतापवान् is mighty and powerful, पीनवक्षाः strong well developed chest, विशालाक्षः has expansive eyes, लक्ष्मीवान् lustrous body, शुभलक्षणः has auspicious qualities (according to science of palmistry).

Mighty and powerful, he has a well proportioned body, neither tall nor short, shining complexion, well developed chest, large eyes, lustrous body and good qualities.
धर्मज्ञस्सत्यसन्धश्च प्रजानां च हिते रतः ।

यशस्वी ज्ञानसम्पन्नश्शुचिर्वश्यस्समाधिमान् ।।1.1.12।।


धर्मज्ञः knower of duties (of protecting those who take refuge in him) of life, सत्यसन्धः firm in his vows, प्रजानाम् for his subjects, हिते doing good, रतः intent on, यशस्वी renowned, ज्ञानसम्पन्नः omniscient, शुचिः pure and devout, वश्यः obedient to elders (or accessible to those who are dependent on him), समाधिमान् meditating on the means of protecting those who took refuge in him.

Pious, firm in his vows, he is ever intent on doing good to his subjects. He is, illustrious, wise, and pure at heart. He is obedient to elders (or accessible to those who are dependent on him) and ever meditating (on the means of protecting those who take refuge in him).